Basic SQL Interview Questions:
What is SQL?

SQL (Structured Query Language) is a standard programming language used to manage and manipulate relational databases. 
It allows users to query, insert, update, and delete data in databases.

What is the difference between SQL and MySQL?

SQL is a query language used for managing databases, while MySQL is an open-source relational database management system (RDBMS) 
that uses SQL to query data.

What is a database?

A database is an organized collection of data, generally stored and accessed electronically from a computer system.

What are tables in SQL?

Tables are database objects that store data in rows and columns. Each row represents a record, and each column represents an 
attribute of the record.

What are the different types of SQL commands?

The main SQL commands are:
DML (Data Manipulation Language): SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE
DDL (Data Definition Language): CREATE, ALTER, DROP
DCL (Data Control Language): GRANT, REVOKE
TCL (Transaction Control Language): COMMIT, ROLLBACK

What is a primary key?

A primary key is a column or a set of columns in a table that uniquely identifies each record in that table. 
It cannot have NULL values.

What is a foreign key?

A foreign key is a column or a set of columns in a table that refers to the primary key in another table, 
establishing a relationship between the two tables.

What is a unique key?

A unique key is a constraint that ensures all values in a column are unique, but unlike the primary key, it can allow NULL values.

What is an index in SQL?

An index is a database object that improves the speed of data retrieval operations on a table at the cost of additional space 
and slower writes.

What is the purpose of the SELECT statement?

The SELECT statement is used to query the database and retrieve data from one or more tables.
How do you retrieve all the records from a table?

You can retrieve all records from a table using:
sql
Copy code
SELECT * FROM table_name;
What is the difference between WHERE and HAVING clauses?

WHERE filters rows before any grouping is done, while HAVING filters rows after the GROUP BY clause.
What is the use of the DISTINCT keyword?

The DISTINCT keyword is used to return only unique values, eliminating duplicate rows in the result set.
What is a JOIN and what are the different types of joins?

A JOIN combines columns from two or more tables based on a related column. Types of joins include:
INNER JOIN: Returns only matching rows.
LEFT JOIN: Returns all rows from the left table and matching rows from the right table.
RIGHT JOIN: Returns all rows from the right table and matching rows from the left table.
FULL OUTER JOIN: Returns all rows when there is a match in either table.
What is the difference between INNER JOIN and OUTER JOIN?

INNER JOIN returns only rows with matching values in both tables, while OUTER JOIN returns all rows from one table 
and matching rows from the other table (if any).
What is the GROUP BY clause used for?

The GROUP BY clause is used to group rows that have the same values into summary rows, 
often used with aggregate functions like COUNT, SUM, AVG.

What is the ORDER BY clause used for?

The ORDER BY clause is used to sort the result set in either ascending (ASC) or descending (DESC) order.
What is the difference between DELETE, TRUNCATE, and DROP?

DELETE: Removes rows from a table but retains the structure. It can be rolled back.
TRUNCATE: Removes all rows from a table and cannot be rolled back.
DROP: Removes the entire table, including its structure and data.
What are aggregate functions?

Aggregate functions perform a calculation on a set of values and return a single result, such as COUNT, SUM, AVG, MIN, and MAX.
How do you count the number of records in a table?

You can count the number of records using:
sql
Copy code
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM table_name;
Intermediate SQL Interview Questions:
What is a subquery and how is it different from a JOIN?

A subquery is a query nested inside another query, used to retrieve data for the outer query. Unlike a JOIN, 
which combines tables, a subquery retrieves data for comparison or filtering.

What is a correlated subquery?

A correlated subquery refers to a subquery that uses values from the outer query. It is evaluated once for each 
row processed by the outer query.

How would you find the second-highest salary from a table?

You can find the second-highest salary using a subquery:
sql
Copy code
SELECT MAX(salary) FROM employees WHERE salary < (SELECT MAX(salary) FROM employees);
What are window functions in SQL?

Window functions perform calculations across a set of table rows related to the current row. 
Examples include ROW_NUMBER(), RANK(), and LEAD().

What is the purpose of the LIKE operator?

The LIKE operator is used to search for a specified pattern in a column. 
It supports wildcards like % (zero or more characters) and _ (single character).

What is a CASE statement?

The CASE statement is used for conditional logic in SQL. It allows returning different values based on certain conditions.
sql
Copy code
SELECT CASE
         WHEN age < 18 THEN 'Minor'
         ELSE 'Adult'
       END AS age_group
FROM users;
What is a stored procedure?

A stored procedure is a set of SQL statements stored in the database, which can be executed as a single call.
What is a trigger in SQL?

A trigger is a set of SQL statements that automatically execute in response to certain events on a table, 
such as INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE.

What is normalization?

Normalization is the process of organizing a database to reduce redundancy and dependency by dividing large tables into smaller ones.
What are the different normal forms in database normalization?

The different normal forms are:
1NF: Eliminate duplicate columns, each record has a unique identifier.
2NF: Remove partial dependency, each non-key column must depend on the entire primary key.
3NF: Remove transitive dependency, all columns must depend directly on the primary key.
What is denormalization?

Denormalization is the process of combining tables or adding redundant data to improve query performance, often at the cost of increased data redundancy.
Explain the difference between UNION and UNION ALL.

UNION combines the results of two queries and removes duplicates, while UNION ALL combines the results but retains duplicates.
What is the difference between CHAR and VARCHAR data types?

CHAR is a fixed-length string, while VARCHAR is a variable-length string. VARCHAR saves space when storing strings of varying lengths.
What is the LIMIT clause used for in SQL?

The LIMIT clause is used to specify the number of rows to return in the result set.
sql
Copy code
SELECT * FROM table_name LIMIT 10;

How can you update data in a table?

Use the UPDATE statement:
sql
Copy code
UPDATE table_name SET column_name = value WHERE condition;
How do you create an index in SQL?

You can create an index using:
sql
Copy code
CREATE INDEX index_name ON table_name (column_name);
What is a self-join?

A self-join is a join where a table is joined with itself, often used to find relationships within the same table.
What is the EXISTS operator in SQL?

The EXISTS operator is used to test whether a subquery returns any results. It returns true if the subquery has at least one record.
What is the IN operator in SQL?

The IN operator is used to filter the results by checking if a value is in a specified list of values.
sql
Copy code
SELECT * FROM table_name WHERE column_name IN (value1, value2, value3);
How do you handle NULL values in SQL?

To handle NULL values, you can use IS NULL or IS NOT NULL to check for NULL values, or COALESCE() to replace NULL with a default value.
Advanced SQL Interview Questions:
What is database partitioning?

Database partitioning involves splitting large tables into smaller, more manageable pieces, improving performance and manageability.
What are triggers and how do they work?

A trigger automatically performs a set of actions when certain events occur in a table, such as an INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE.
What is SQL injection and how can you prevent it?

SQL injection is a technique used to manipulate SQL queries by injecting malicious code. To prevent it, use parameterized queries or prepared statements.
How would you design an optimized query?

To optimize a query, you should use indexes, avoid using SELECT *, limit the number of rows, 
and use EXPLAIN to analyze the query execution plan.
What are CTEs (Common Table Expressions) in SQL?

A CTE is a temporary result set defined within a query. It improves query readability and allows recursion.
sql
Copy code
WITH CTE AS (SELECT * FROM table_name WHERE condition)
SELECT * FROM CTE;
What is an execution plan in SQL and how do you read it?

An execution plan shows how SQL queries are executed by the database. It provides insights into query performance, including the types of joins and indexes used.
How do you handle performance issues in SQL?

Performance can be improved by indexing frequently queried columns, optimizing query structure, using proper joins, and partitioning large tables.
Explain the ACID properties in SQL.

ACID stands for Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability, which are properties that guarantee reliable transaction processing.
What is a materialized view?

A materialized view stores the result of a query as a physical table, 
improving performance for complex queries but requiring periodic refreshing.
How do you implement transactions in SQL?

Transactions are implemented using BEGIN TRANSACTION, COMMIT, and ROLLBACK. These ensure that a series of operations are completed successfully or not at all.